In this video,
we'll quickly review how the Federal Reserve Bank sets interest
rates and how those interest rates influence the macroeconomy.
Then,
we'll apply this knowledge to a
real-world scenario by interpreting Fed macroeconomic data
and giving a policy recommendation to the Fed
on whether to lower or raise interest rates.
Remember that the Fed has two mandates or jobs.
The first is to keep inflation rates low and stable,
roughly 2% per year.
The second is maximum employment.
Make sure as many people who want to have jobs can have jobs,
as long as this doesn't conflict
with the Fed's price stability goals.
So how does the Fed achieve these goals?
The Fed has the ability to set a target federal funds rate,
or the rate banks charge to lend to each other overnight.
Remember,
in the past,
the Fed would influence the supply of bank reserves or cash.
Banks have on hand,
but
today,
banks have a large amount.
Of reserves.
So instead of influencing supply,
the Fed influences demand by paying interest on those bank reserves.
The Fed pays banks interest to hold cash
using this rate plus the overnight repo rate and discount rate.
The Fed can select a target federal funds rate.
The Fed's target interest rate
acts as a floor or lower bound interest rate in the economy.
That's because lending money to the Fed is basically risk-free.
If you are a bank,
why lend to anyone else at a lower rate
when you can just lend to the Fed and know you'll be paid back?
So,
if the Fed sets the target rate at 3.5%,
That means rates in the economy typically won't be lower than that,
and for consumers or businesses are usually higher.
For example,
the rate the bank will lend you to buy a home is usually about 2 to 3% higher,
or
6.22% today,
and credit card rates are much higher at almost 20%.
So,
the Fed sets this base rate as low
or as high as it thinks necessary,
and then all the other rates follow.
But
how do interest rates affect things in the economy?
One of the main ways is through investment spending.
When interest rates go lower from I1 to I2,
the quantity of investment rises from L1 to L2.
Businesses take advantage of cheaper borrowing costs
to expand their businesses by building factories,
buying machines,
or building out new stores.
When investment demand increases,
so does our aggregate demand curve.
It shifts to the right.
This leads to a new equilibrium point in the economy where real GDP
Y2,
and the price level,
P2,
are both higher.
Therefore,
lowering interest rates stimulates economic activity.
Raising both economic output as well as the price level.
This is called expansionary monetary policy
because it expands the economy.
The Fed would typically use this policy when real
GDP was low and unemployment was relatively high.
This would help fulfill the Fed's role by trying
to bring the economy back to maximum employment.
On the flip side,
an increase in interest rates leads to a decrease in investment spending.
This causes aggregate demand to decrease
as business borrow less money and invest less.
The aggregate demand curve shifts to the left,
and a new equilibrium is reached where both real GDP and the price level are lower.
This is called contractionary monetary policy
and is used when the price level
or inflation in the economy is too high.
In conclusion,
the Fed chooses what level of interest rates it wants to target
using the vast amounts of economic data it has at its disposal
that give it a picture of the current health of the economy.
If the price level or inflation is going up too quickly or higher than its target,
it will use contractionary monetary policy to bring inflation down.
To a lower level.
And if employment levels in the economy are lower than it would like,
it will use expansionary monetary policy
to push employment back up to a higher level.
These are big decisions that the Fed governors don't take lightly.
The state of the entire economy and therefore
US citizens' livelihoods rest on these decisions.